CAPSTONE PROJECT 1
Proposal
Deep Learning for Lightning Flash Classification Using Geostationary Satellite Imagery
by
Chai Wen Cheng
23073679
Bachelor of Science (Honours) in Computer Science
Supervisor: Associate Professor Ir Ts. Dr Wong Shen Yuong
Semester: September2025
Date: 30 December, 2025
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence
Faculty of Engineering and Technology
Sunway University
Table of Contents
Abstract2
Chapter 1 Introduction3
1.1 Background3
1.2 Problem Statement4
1.3 Objectives and Scope4
1.4 Significance & Impact6
Chapter 2 Literature Review8
2.1 Lightning Nowcasting: The Shift from Traditional to Deep Learning-Based Solutions8
2.2 Satellite Imagery and Thunderstorm Analysis10
2.3 Research Gap Identification12
Chapter 3: Methodology14
3.1 Data Acquisition14
3.2 Data Preprocessing and Augmentation16
3.3 Model Architecture Design17
3.4 Implementation Tools20
3.5 Evaluation Strategy20
3.6 Ethical Considerations and Constraints22
Chapter 4: Work Plan & Timeline25
References27
Abstract
Lightning is one of the most hazardous natural phenomena, especially in tropical areas like Malaysia. However, accurate and timely lightning nowcasts remain challenging due to the rapid growth and change of convective clouds. In this paper, we will address lightning nowcasting by estimating the probability of cloud-to-ground lightning occurrence using geostationary satellite imagery and deep learning. Concretely, this paper aims to develop a convolutional neural network (CNN) approach that can nowcast cloud-to-ground lightning from geostationary satellites like Himawari-8, using historical ground lightning data from the Malaysian Meteorological Department (MMD) as the ground truth. This involves gathering geostationary satellite multispectral imagery and the corresponding ground lightning strike record, image and data processing and preparation, and the development of CNNs with Python using TensorFlow and/or PyTorch engines based on a VGG and/or ResNet structure. Metrics are performed to assess the performance of the models that include accuracy, the F1 score, ROC-AUC, among others. Possible outcomes of this paper are to develop a tool that can generate a short-term nowcast or warning about lightning for Malaysia using a similar approach and technique. Also, there are dimensions and limitations of the project, including image and data integrity, resource cost. This work is expected to contribute to improving early warning systems for hazards related to lightning, further promoting deep learning applications in meteorological analytics.
Chapter 1 Introduction
1.1 Background
Lightning poses a significant threat to human life and property, resulting in numerous deaths and damages every year. The occurrence of lightning happens at an extremely high rate worldwide – 40 to 50 lightning strikes every second worldwide (Christian et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2023). There are tens of millions of lightning events annually, resulting in over ten thousand deaths and billions of dollars of damages (Wang et al., 2023). The density of lightning occurrence in Malaysia is also incredibly high and among the top countries in the world in terms of lightning occurrence (Nazri et al., 2021). Being a tropical country with monsoon climatic conditions, there are areas in Malaysia that experience as many as 200 thunderstorm days per year, and the ground flash density of lightning is also incredibly high at 15-20 strikes per square kilometer annually (Nazri et al., 2021). There have been substantial improvements in technology regarding the observation and measurement of lightning. Ground-based lightning detection networks (LDNs) rely on sensor arrays, including radiofrequency antennas and interferometers, to locate lightning events. The Malaysian Meteorological Department (MMD) has established the Lightning Detection System, a network of sensor stations throughout Peninsular Malaysia (Mehranzamir et al., 2023). The sensor system is capable of detecting the cloud-to-ground (CG) discharge and reporting lightning events in near-real time. The power companies, including Tenaga Nasional Berhad Research, also have lightning location systems in place to safeguard power infrastructure (Mehranzamir et al., 2023). However, ground-based sensor networks have constraints in coverage (e.g., the efficiency may decrease in sparsely populated sensor arrays, or the system may not efficiently detect distant oceanic lightning events) and are expensive, with both initial and maintenance costs (Goodman et al., 2013; Mehranzamir et al., 2023). Until recently, the observation of lightning from space has been limited. The launch of the Geostationary Lightning Mapper (GLM) on the U.S. GOES geostationary weather satellites has enabled the first optical lightning mapping from geostationary orbit (Goodman et al., 2013). The Geostationary Lightning Mapper has the capability to detect both cloud-to-ground and intra-cloud lightning events through the optical imaging of lightning illuminations from space, ensuring relatively uniform spatial distribution in the Americas (Goodman et al., 2013). However, there is not a similar instrument in the Asian domain; thus, the country only has the services of the ground network. This is a weakness in our capacity to observe and nowcast lightning events within the short term in the Asian domain. Addressing the gap with alternative approaches is a key motivation behind this project.
1.2 Problem Statement
Despite the high risk of lightning hazards happening in Malaysia, the current state for timely lightning nowcasting and warnings is insufficient. Conventional numerical weather prediction systems often struggle to provide reliable lightning nowcast within the required spatiotemporal resolution due to the complex multi-scale physics underlying the process of electrification in thunderstorms (Wang et al., 2023). Surface lightning systems are very useful for post-event observation but are not capable of providing warnings or are available to the public for real-time monitoring in Malaysia (Mehranzamir et al., 2023). Specialized lightning sensors using satellites, such as Geostationary Lightning Mapper, are not available in the region; thus, the technical gap in the remote sensing process for lightning observation is high. As a result, the lightning warnings regarding prevention and safety measures are often issued to the community with very limited lead times.
The problem under investigation can be stated briefly as follows: How can existing geostationary satellite data be used to nowcast lightning occurrences over Malaysia, improving early warning systems? In other words, can there be a recognition of the possible occurrence or presence of a lightning flash, based on certain characteristics retrieved from the meteorological satellite data, such as Himawari-8, analyzed using modern approaches provided by deep learning algorithms? The problem is based on the identification of possible antecedent characteristics or features visible in the satellite data, leading to the generation of timely nowcasts or warnings, up to a period of one hour, preferably giving a warning signal for possible lightning occurrences. Another aspect is dealing with the problem of imbalance, where the data is imbalanced, with a high number of non-lightning images compared to lightning images.
1.3 Objectives and Scope
Based on the problem statement, the paper comprises the following objectives:
• O1: Data Acquisition and Integration. Integrate a collection of historical lightning data with corresponding satellite images obtained from the Himawari-8 satellite. This will involve collecting historical lightning flash data in terms of time and coordinate data (time, latitude, and longitude) of strikes, as well as multi-spectral satellite images of corresponding events. The region of interest in this case will be Malaysia and neighboring areas, which are monitored by the Himawari-8 satellite.
• O2: Image Preprocessing and Labeling. A preprocessing step needs to be developed to make the dataset amenable to learning. This involves aligning lightning strikes with pixels/areas of satellite images, assigning images/pixels as “lightning” and “no lightning” depending upon the strike occurrence, and then considering issues such as parallax (geolocation discrepancies of high clouds in satellite images). A suitable spatial and temporal window needs to be identified for assigning labels to images (for example, assigning a label to an image patch based on the strike of a cloud-to-ground lightning stroke in the spatial neighborhood).
• O3: CNN Model Development. Create and train a convolutional neural network to nowcast the occurrence of cloud-to-ground lightning within the next 0-60minutes given the satellite images. This may be done using a pre-trained feature extractor (like VGG-16 and ResNet-50) (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; He et al., 2016) as a baseline. This might be a custom CNN classifier or a semantic segmentation network designed to output per-pixel (or per-patch) nowcast probability map of lightning for a defined lead-time window. The proposed approach aims to train the network to learn image features like the brightness and texture of the top of the cloud, which indicate the occurrence of lightning.
• O4: Performance Evaluation. Evaluate the trained model on a test set with relevant measures of accuracy, precision, recall, F1 measure, and the ROC curve/AUC. Because the lightning detection task is a high-stakes domain, care will be taken to specifically minimize false negatives while keeping the false positives in check. Comparative studies will be made between adopting different CNN models or different input settings, like single infrared input vs. multi-band input channels.
• O5: Deliverables and Deployment Issues. Outline the deployment strategy for the model (e.g., as a resource for the MMD or a local authority). Although a complete deployment strategy will be beyond the scope of the proposal, factors will include the speed of inference (where the new images must be processed quickly by the model) and integration with the existing warning systems in place. Documentation and an accompanying user manual will be included in the deliverables. Scope and Limitations: The project will focus on lightning flash nowcasting, and will not involve longer-range lightning forecasting. It will also not focus on anything other than the use of lightning flash data from the Himawari-8 AHIs and the pre-existing lightning flash records in the Malaysian climate. It will also not focus on any other sources, whether weather radars, weather observation stations, or computer model outputs. It shall, however, focus on cloud-to-ground lightning, which corresponds to those near the ground observation stations. The project will also not involve the classification of lightning flash types, whether intra-cloud lightning flashes or cloud-to-ground lightning flashes. The project will, however, focus on the Malaysian climate, that is, the model shall be developed and shall be validated in the Malaysian climate. The project shall, however, focus on the use of at least one high-power graphics card, which shall be necessary in training deep convolutional neural networks when the dataset involves a large number of images. The spatial resolution of the data, whether satellite images, shall also limit the resolution with which lightning flash positions shall be determined. The spatial resolution shall, for example, be 2 km/pixel when using the infrared satellites on the Himawari-8 satellites.
1.4 Significance & Impact
Lightning prediction is of high relevance to computing science and the well-being of society. Within computing science, this project relies on the most advanced deep learning-based computer vision approach to tackle an issue that is spatiotemporal in nature, thus pushing the frontiers of CNN application potential even when handling noisy geophysical data. A successful lightning prediction task based on satellite images would thus serve as the validation of the capability of data-intensive approaches to seek predictive information from complex images of the atmosphere. Finally, this project would contribute to the growing body of knowledge within the application of artificial intelligence to meteorology and may help pave the way for the potential combination of artificial intelligence models and traditional models within current weather forecasting systems (Wang et al., 2023). On the societal side, the improvement in the accuracy of lightning nowcasting will lead to the direct enhancement of safety and resilience to lightning-related hazards. Lightning poses one of the biggest dangers among storm-related deaths in the tropics and has the potential to ignite wildfires,emit power outages, and interfere with air transport (Lee & Suh, 2024). The early warning systems will allow event organizers, road workers, air transport systems, and the wider public to prepare for lightning by taking appropriate measures (such as taking shelter before the onset of lightning). Lead times of 10-30 min have the potential to make the difference between life and death. The results from the current project could find their way into the weather observation systems in the Malaysian government to generate automated notifications about lightning risks from satellites, thus solving the problem posed by the lack of the geostationary lightning imager in the surrounding regions. The current project aims to contribute to the goals of sustainable development and resilience to climate changes. On the other hand, the existing literature on climate studies the changes in lightning patterns that could arise with global warming (Romps et al., 2014; Lee & Suh, 2024), hence increasing the risk levels. Taking the initiative to produce reliable tools for lightning predictions during the current period is part of the adaptation strategy for the changes that are taking place in the climate. In conclusion, the current project has the potential to bring about large impacts on various aspects.
Chapter 2 Literature Review
2.1 Lightning Nowcasting: The Shift from Traditional to Deep Learning-Based Solutions
Lightning nowcasting and classification have long been difficult problems in the field of meteorology. The traditional approaches to lightning nowcasting involve detecting the atmospheric conditions favorable for the formation of thunderstorms; for instance, the lightning potential has traditionally been estimated using the temperature, humidity, and wind profile (Wang et al., 2023). Currently, numerical weather prediction (NWP) models are capable of predicting convection to a degree, though detailed simulations of lightning processes entail the use of high grid spacing and intricate physics that have been known to produce large errors (Wang et al., 2023). As such, current lightning nowcasting systems (predictions that range from 0 to 1 hour) involve the use of heuristic systems, whereby the rapid enhancement of radar signal intensity or cloud tops indicative of satellites could indicate forthcoming lightning.
With the development of machine learning, there are novel possibilities for lightning nowcasting and flash classifications that involve the application of machine learning to the data-driven discovery of antecedents of lightning. The initial application of machine learning included regression and decision-tree methodologies that associated environment-related variables with lightning activity. Artificial neural networks and the development of random forests utilizing the data associated with the storms were able to produce the predicted rate of lightning flashes to some degree of success (Wang et al., 2023).
The emergence of deep learning during the 2010s, especially CNNs for image recognition, has significantly impacted lightning prediction research. Deep learning models have the capability to learn features directly from raw data, like images, which is highly valuable for the analysis of satellite images. One of the most important advancements was the development of a CNN-based satellite lightning prediction system, called LightningCast, designed for lightning prediction across the United States by Cintineo et al. (2022). The model proposed the utilization of satellite images from the GOES-16 satellite to predict the probability of lightning events during the next hour for every pixel. LightningCast proposed the usage of a U-Net architecture-based CNN for image prediction and was trained using a dataset containing satellite images labeled by the presence or absence of lightning events using the GOES Lightning Mapper (Cintineo et al., 2022). The model proved that a satellite image alone (visible and infrared channels capturing cloud properties) can give a strongly robust result for short-term lightning forecasts, often giving a lead time of above 20 minutes for newly initiated lightning (Cintineo et al., 2022). The model identified signs like rapidly upgrowing convective towers and cold cloud tops, which are acknowledged scientific precursors for lightning events. The proposed system gave an excellent area under the curve and reasonable skill scores during evaluation and has been tested at the NOAA’s Hazardous Weather Testbed and received positive responses (Cintineo et al., 2022). Such success stories encourage researchers to apply deep learning models to lightning nowcasting on a global scale. Zhou et al. (2020) introduced a deep learning network for cloud-to-ground lightning forecasting in China, which combined multi-source information from satellite imagery, radar reflectivity, total lightning, and model analyses. Their multi-input deep neural network made better forecasts of lightning than models using single source information, which highlights the flexibility of CNN models in handling multi-modal datasets. Interestingly, even with single satellite data, quicker advances have been made. In South Korea, Lee and Suh (2024) attempted lightning prediction with GK2A geostationary satellite imagery and ground-based lightning sensors. They tested CNN models for their potential in lightning prediction and found a high probability of detection (90%) before post-processing, although this came at the cost of some false alarms that required filtering using other approaches (Lee & Suh, 2024). Their work also verified that clouds with top altitudes in satellite-observed infrared imagery are effective in determining the probability of accompanying lightning in those clouds (Lee & Suh, 2024). The authors Li et al. (2025) also built a deep learning system using Himawari-8 satellite water vapor and infrared channels to forecast lightning on a 5-60 minute forecast window in China. The authors used a Recurrent-Convolutional Neural Network that tracked changes in cloud features with time and enabled them to forecast the frequency of lightning in a 2 hour forecast window (Li et al., 2025). Leinonen et al. (2022) further investigated other deep learning models that “integrate” CNN and Recurrent Neural Networks to perform “lightning nowcasting without gaps” or seamless prediction in time. Their published model, found in Artificial Intelligence for Earth Systems, used an ‘encoder-decoder’ CNN-LSTM network that forecasted probability of lightning on a 5-minute time scale and outperformed traditional extrapolation models (Leinonen et al., 2022). However, these studies point out in one voice that deep learning is currently at the forefront of lightning nowcasting using remote sensing, and this success can be attributed to their potential in “automatically learning” visual and spatial and temporal signals that precede cloud lightning.
2.2 Satellite Imagery and Thunderstorm Analysis
Geostationary weather satellites, such as Japan’s Himawari-8, offer a regular, multispectral imaging service that is useful for monitoring convective storm development. Operating since 2015, Himawari-8 continuously observes Asia/Pacific full disk images in 16 spectral channels (visible, near-infrared, and infrared) with a native temporal resolution of 10 minutes (Bessho et al., 2016). The satellite offers high-resolution visible images during daytime and infrared images around the clock, allowing for continuous monitoring of cloud development, movement, and temperature. Such abilities have been exploited in earlier research applications, namely convective initiation forecasting and severe storm detection. For example, Lagerquist et al. (2021) used images from Himawari-8 to forecast convective storms over the Taiwan area by training a CNN (named U-Net) to forecast radar reflectivity maps (a proxy for thunderstorms) up to two hours into the future. The deep learning algorithm, trained on a combination of historical images provided by Himawari-8 and radar maps, outperformed random forecasting significantly for forecasts beyond 30-60 minutes (Lagerquist et al., 2021). This establishes that satellite data contains discriminative, storm-initiation-related information that can be mined by a deep learning algorithm. For example, another research paper by MDPI, by authors Lu et al. (2022), combined satellite images with terrain data to analyze lightning occurrences within China. The authors proposed a CNN algorithm that combined data from multiple spatial sources (including images provided by Himawari-8 and terrain data) to forecast lightning occurrence, demonstrating that integrating image features based on geographic data can improve predictions (Lu et al., 2022). These studies altogether emphasize that lightning forecasting feasibility relies upon capabilities offered by satellite images. The most important image features useful for lightning forecasting are necessarily extreme cold clouds TopTemperature, image evidence of textured Overshooting Top clouds, growth rate, and infrared spectral contrasts indicative of ice clouds.
With respect to lightning flash classification in satellite images, the literature mentions several methods of structuring the learning task:
• Classification on a patch level: There are also investigations that divide satellite images into a grid of patches, then classify them into lightning and non-lightning. These include Sulaiman et al. (2023) in Malaysia, who used a feed-forward network to predict lightning occurrence in coastal areas based on summary statistics of observed cloud characteristics. Even though this one did not use the capability of CNN in analyzing images, it is a kind of patch classification concept, whereby the probability of lightning in each region is determined. A CNN can improve this by analyzing the image patches directly.
• Pixel-wise segmentation: This method, as demonstrated by LightningCast (Cintineo et al., 2022), among other examples, assigns a probability to every pixel of the satellite image grid, hence tackling the task as an image segmentation problem to detect those belonging to the “lightning” class. Accurate lightning truth data at the image grid level are needed, and these sources are the GLM satellite in the United States and ground-based observations adjusted to the grid level for Malaysia. The issue of accurately associating ground-based lightning observations with satellite pixel locations is mentioned by Lee and Suh (2024).
• Time series forecasting: Some works make use of the sequence of past image data for forecasting the probability of lightning at the following times, thus including the temporal component. As mentioned, the works by Li et al. (2025) and Leinonen et al. (2022) utilized the recurrent layers (ConvLSTM) in the model in order to learn the progression of forming storm systems before the occurrence of lightning. This tends to enhance the lead time but reduces the complexity. One possible approach might begin with the same-time (0-10 minutes lead time) classification.
On the basis of these studies, some ideas that can be adopted in this project include utilizing multi-spectral channels (the contrast between infrared and water vapor channels, showing convective strength, as used in Li et al., 2025), as well as focusing on convective clouds. It is worth mentioning that almost all deep learning lightning forecasting methods confine their application domain to convective cloud pixels, since over deep non-convective regions, the lightning probability is close to zero (Cintineo et al., 2022). In some cases, these methods use cloud classification algorithms to mask out non-convective or clear regions before performing CNN-based forecasting. Such a strategy might also be explored in this project (identifying deep convective cloud clusters, then implementing lightning cloud classifiers limited to these regions).
2.3 Research Gap Identification
A review of literature shows that deep learning for lightning forecasting is an emerging field with encouraging outcomes. However, a separate research gap emerges regarding the application of such models in the Malaysian and Southeast Asian setting per se. Most existing models (such as LightningCast) were designed and tested either in North America or East Asia, and satellite and lightning data—both of which are dataset-specific—are used. Additionally, existing models do not capture the atmospheric dynamics of the tropical maritime continent encompassed by countries such as Malaysia; for example, thunderstorms in the land are typically isolated but have high intensities because of high moisture and instability levels. To date, there is limited work regarding the development of a model for lightning forecasting appropriate to the Malaysian climate setting and based on Malaysian datasets. Sulaiman et al. (2023) are of the very limited research conducted in Malaysia; however, they only utilized a simple neural network model and manual feature selection and had only moderately acceptable results. To date, there are limited published work pertaining to the use of Himawari-8 satellite images and Malaysia’s ground observation of lightnings combined in a CNN model. It is further mentioned that Lee & Suh (2024) successfully identified lightnings through the use of Korea’s GK2A satellite; however, post-processing had to be conducted to remove possible false positives and tested only on small datasets. Still much scope exists regarding further generalization and lessening false alarms (Lee & Suh, 2024).
Another area of research would be in the application of many deep learning models for lightning where the application is for nowcasting with rapid updates and involved models for the time dimension (ConvLSTMs and several inputs into the time stream). In some applications, the ability for a classification approach to the current state of lightning occurrences or imminence for nowcasting could be very valuable for integration with alarm systems for greater safety for many people. A real-time system classifying convective clouds as either electrically active or not would be a valuable adjunct system. This research project fills a specific niche with a focus on flash classification or detecting lightning with the potential for very short-term nowcasting rather than long-term predictions to potentially achieve more significant outcomes with a less involved CNN architecture.
In summary, the research gaps that the proposed project seeks to fill are:
- Regional Data and Model: The development of the lightning classification model tailored for the Malaysian region based on the Himawari-8 data, enabling the first application in the tropical region that has high lightning occurrences. - Methodological Simplicity
• Showing that even with a simple CNN classifier architecture which does not involve complex temporal modeling, there is the potential to provide useful lightning detection and nowcasting. - Integration of Sources: Evaluation of the performance of satellite-only predictions by comparing the output of the model with ground reports from the Malaysia Meteorological Department (MMD). This will highlight the integration between space-based observation and ground truth in an area where lightning satellites do not exist. The work leverages previous research by incorporating successful aspects of it (CNNs, transfer learning, using multiple spectral channels) and applying them to a different context with different data. The objective is to develop a useful tool for local meteorological offices and to offer a research example of generalization of deep learning for Earth sciences. A successful example of such a project may well represent the first comprehensive lightning flash classification scheme for Malaysia and may possibly be further applied to other neighboring countries visible by the Himawari-8 satellite.
Chapter 3: Methodology
3.1 Data Acquisition
For this research, two main data sources are to be used: (1) lightning data provided by the Malaysian Meteorological Department (MMD) and (2) satellite images provided by the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) via the Himawari-8 satellite. The lightning data will be acquired from MMD's Lightning Detection System (LDS), which records data related to the occurrence of cloud to ground lightning flashes as recorded by detectors around Malaysia, as well as, if available, neighboring areas. Typically, these systems record data on a timescale measured in seconds, along with location data accurate to a several hundred meters spatial scale (Mehranzamir et al., 2023). For this research, a data set spanning a period of at least 2 to 3 years, for example, 2018 to 2020, will be requested to acquire sufficient data to train a deep learning algorithm. These data are expected to contain information about, among other parameters, time, location, current peaks, and so on, but for analysis, only data reflecting time and location are necessary.
The corresponding Himawari-8 satellite images will be obtained via the open archive facility provided by the JMA or the Himawari data archive hosted by NOAA. Specifically, Advanced Himawari Imager (AHI) images will be utilized, focusing on bands proven to provide valuable information on convective systems, such as the infrared thermal bands at 10.4 µm (conventionally used for cloud top temperature), the water vapor band at 6.2 µm, and potentially the visible band at 0.64 µm for daytime scenes (Lee & Suh, 2024; Li et al., 2025). The spatial resolution is native to 2 km for infrared bands and 0.5 km for the visible band (Bessho et al., 2016). Full Disk images, which include the East Asia-Western Pacific domain, are provided every 10 minutes. In order to work with manageable data sizes, the images will be cropped to the area surrounding Peninsular Malaysia, East Malaysia (Borneo), and the regions around them, which essentially form a box defined by 20°×20° in latitude and longitude. The size of each individual image will form a multichannel tensor (predicting 3-5 interest bands). The collection will include images corresponding to the occurrence of lightning or the nearest temporal resolutions, and will include a large sampling from images that did not produce lightning events to function as the negative examples.
Data association and labeling: Lightning events would be matched with the closest Himawari-8 image frames using time stamps. Each Himawari-8 image frame at time t will be labeled based on whether cloud-to-ground lightning occurs within a lead-time window after acquisition (e.g., t to t+60 minutes) in the corresponding spatial neighborhood. Since Himawari-8 image frames are taken every 10 minutes and the lightning data are time-stamped to the second, for each image at time t, all lightning events occurring in [t, t+60 minutes] are associated with that image and mapped to their corresponding locations in the image. The Himawari-8 frame is then annotated to form the target labels (e.g., a binary label per patch/pixel: 1 if ≥1 strike occurs in the window, else 0). Training labels would be created using either of the two following methods: (a) a per-pixel labeling technique would annotate image pixels as “lightning” if lightning occurred within the pixel area or a surrounding neighborhood during the time frame or “no lightning” for pixels not annotated as lightning; or (b) a patches/classification technique would isolate image patches with a size of, say, 64×64 image pixels or about a 128×128 km area with a lightning event at the center for the positive set and from areas not containing lightning for the negative set with patches of a comparable size. This would depend on the initial density analysis of the data set with a plan to potentially use the more efficient patches for training CNN if lightning data is less dense or image classification for segmentation training for dense lightning data. It would be important to note at this point that the LDS of MMD distinguishes cloud-to-ground lightning; the labeling would be focused on cloud-to-ground lightning. Intra-cloud lightning beyond the range of ground sensors would be assumed to be "unlabeled" meaning the CNN would be trained to discern only cloud-to-ground lightning.
In order to improve reproducibility and reduce bias, the dataset will be divided based on timestamps (for example, 2018 and 2019 for training and 2020 for validation and testing). In addition, the dataset will be balanced as much as possible; since there are many non-lightning images in the dataset, either the downsampling of the negative samples might be utilized or the oversampling and weighting approach will be implemented to ensure a fair balance between the positive and negative ratios during training and prevent learning to predict “no lightning.”
3.2 Data Preprocessing and Augmentation
Before putting the images into a CNN, several operations will be performed:
- Georeferencing and Alignment: The alignment of the satellite image grid and the lightning locations should be done. This is because the data form Himawari-8 is usually given in the geographical projection of a satellite image. The lightning locations would be transformed into the pixel coordinates of the satellite image projection system. There would be minor navigation errors (parallax of high clouds), and a tolerance would be given (1-2 pixel radius of lightning locations around the mapped location, as done by Lee & Suh, 2024).
- Cloud Masking: Region identification to exclude areas without substantial cloud coverage. This could entail the use of a brightness temperature threshold in the infrared bands (for instance, to exclude pixels above 290 K to represent clear pixels or shallow clouds) to focus training in areas with the possibility of deep convection. Alternatively, clustering of values for pixels could be employed to delineate cloudy and clear pixels. - Normalization: Normalize the pixel values of each channel. For example, the infrared temperature data (in Kelvin) can be normalized to brightness temperature anomalies or values between 0 and 1. In this case, the visible channel will be normalized between 0 and 1. Multiple bands will be combined together as a multi-band input (for example, a 3-band input of [10.4 µm, 6.2 µm, or 12.3 µm bands] or any other combination). - Data Augmentation: For improving robustness properties, on-the-fly data augmentation of the training imagery should be carried out. Some strategies for this could involve rotation or flipping of patches in an image, since cloud patterns are independent of orientation, and some translation and intensity jitter, which would simulate differences in calibration. However, these should not include those that significantly change their weather content, like drastic changes in intensity, which are not a correct representation of the intensity of storms. - Balancing and Batch Creation: For patch-level training, the batch will comprise a combination of lightning and non-lightning images. However, for full images, either cropping or large batches may be necessary for sufficient representation. Weighting of classes in the loss function may also be considered for counterbalancing, giving greater prominence to lightning images. Throughout the pre-processing stage, a validation set will be held back with no augmentation (except for normalization), in order to evaluate the actual performance. The temporal aspect will be maintained to keep order in the sequence of the data, aligned with lightning times in case sequential data is used. With the emphasis on single-step classification, handling time will involve identifying the correct satellite frame relative to the lightning event.
3.3 Model Architecture Design
The key element of the project is the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) designed to learn the ability to nowcast lightning occurrenceswithin the next Δt minutes based on images. There are two architectural models being considered, potentially available for empirical testing: patch-level CNN classifier and the fully convolutional segmentation CNN.
1. Patch-level CNN: This architecture will pose the problem as a binary classification task—to predict whether an image patch will experience at least one CG strike within the next 60 minutes (label 1) or not (label 0). This will enable the use of existing image classification networks. The pre-trained networks known for their performance in extracting image features will be utilized: VGG-16 and ResNet-50 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; He et al., 2016). Weights in the CNN will be initialized using ImageNet pre-training to facilitate transfer learning; it will be understood that the images are not natural images; however, basic features like edges might be useful. The input will be the multi-spectral patch; if it requires three channels, the single-channel data can be copied three times, or the first layer could be modified to directly process multi-channel images. The last classification layer will be discarded and replaced by a dense layer consisting of a single neuron using the sigmoid activation function for binary classification. Training will be performed by fine-tuning the weights of the CNN model. The depth (16-layer in VGG-16, 50 in ResNet-50) should be sufficient to extract complex features; skip connections in ResNet might also facilitate training with a limited dataset by improving gradients (He et al., 2016). Overfitting will be tested; if it happens, early layers will be frozen in the pre-trained model while only the rest along with the new binary classification layer will be trained. In the event that the pre-trained networks are too complex for the amount of data in the dataset being utilized by the project, a simplified new CNN (3-4 convolutional layers followed by couple of dense layers) might be required. The model will predict a probability for the patch; when evaluating an entire image, the binary classification will be applied in a sliding fashion across the areas or across manually predefined cloud segments.
2. Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) / U-Net: This method involves processing an entire satellite image or a substantial portion thereof and outputting a two-dimensional probability map of lightning, thus segmentingpixels that are “lightning active.” The design of this approach, with features in both U-Net’s encoder and decoder stages and further supplemented with skip connections for retaining spatial information, makes it highly applicable in this matter, considering applications in both Ronneberger et al. (2015) and Ronneberger et al. A basic implementation would involve four downsampling convolution layers with further four upsampling layers, with convolution layers in these blocks accompanied by ReLU activation functions, and possible batch normalization. The final layer would then be a single-channel convolution layer with a sigmoid activation function, with the probability map having a spatial shape similar to that of input satellite data, which could be available from MMD and generated as a binary target map will be generated to indicate pixels (or grid cells) where one or more cloud-to-ground (CG) lightning strikes occur within the lead-time window after image time t (e.g., [t, t+60 minutes]), marked as 1, and 0 otherwise. The model can then be trained using pixel-wise binary cross-entropy (BCE) averaged over the image. To address class imbalance (many more 0s than 1s), the loss may use focal loss or a combination of BCE + focal loss, where focal loss reduces the contribution of easy/background negatives and focuses learning on hard, misclassified examples. The major advantage of FCN comes with using spatial information available in the entire satellite image, making connections between cloud formations in different parts of an image and points of lightning in other locations possible for machine learning, though this comes at an “increase in memory requirements and greater variability” required for learning effective and representative insights. As resources are not a constraint, this approach should also be implemented and contrasted with that of patch classification. A combination approach, using both patch classification and further applying that classification in a sliding window manner, generating a probability map, could also be implemented, though this approach is less straightforward and less elegant as that of FCN.
Chosen Architecture: As a Bachelor’s project involves time limitations, it is expected that the first model will be patch level CNN classifier-based. As a candidate model to be trained first, ResNet-50 is preferred due to its known resilience against lightning and moderate size (He et al., 2016). The skip connection structure in ResNet is beneficial in training models on smaller datasets to avoid overfitting, and in fact, other studies have shown excellent performance in lightning-related tasks, lightning detection in particular, using ResNet architecture (e.g., Lee & Suh, 2024). In addition, should this be a requirement, the input layer of the ResNet-50 model will be adjusted to handle a four- or five-input channels structure (e.g., average weights or single input, triplicate input in different filters). The model will produce a single sigmoid output to show the existence of lightning. Binary cross entropy loss function will be used in training the model, along with optimizers Adam or Stochastic Gradient Descent with momentum methods. Validation loss will help in early kernel stoppage.
Various learning techniques, such as learning rate adjustment (starting with a somewhat low learning rate during the fine-tuning of pre-trained weights, potentially to be lowered further during the final stages of learning in the interest of faster convergence), will be used during learning. Focal loss might be used in cases of large class imbalance to prefer hard examples, a technique effective in object detection learning about rare events. Also to be explored will be the choice of thresholds, as well as region aggregation, whereby the probability output for a region of interest will be used to define "lightning likely," with a threshold chosen based on the ROC curve in relation to validation to balance false positives vs. false negatives relative to the specific use scenario (e.g., lowering it somewhat in a public safety context to favor a warning).
Summary of Planned Model Specifications:
• Architecture: CNN-based classifier (ResNet-50) or an FCN/U-Net segmentation model.
- Input: Multi-channel satellite images (presumably involving 3-5 channels, including the infrared and visible parts of the spectrum).
-Output: Probability of lightning per patch or per pixel.
- Core layers: convolutional layers with ReLU activation functions; convolutional layers with max pooling for the classifier and upsampling for the U-Net architecture; final dense layer for the classifier; optional batch normalization. - Regularization: Dropout for dense layers (if they exist), L2 regularization for weights of convolutional layers. - Metrics: Compute, besides the loss, accuracy, precision, recall, F1, the meteorology-relevant values like the True Skill Statistic (TSS) or the Heidke Skill Score (HSS). The HSS is cited in comparative studies, for example, in (Lee & Suh, 2024).
3.4 Implementation Tools
The coding and implementation would be carried out using Python, with emphasis on state-of-the-art deep learning libraries. For this, we would like to employ TensorFlow with the Keras API, which would be our preferred toolkit for implementation (Abadi et al., 2016). The use of TensorFlow would be preferred due to ease of implementation using high-level APIs in Keras, and also either because of, or in spite of, PyTorch, which could also be used for some experimentation, if necessary for comparison or analysis (Paszke et al., 2019). As far as other Python libraries are concerned, those could include NumPy and pandas for some calculations, with possible usage of libraries like xarray or netCDF4, depending on handling requirements for files that are, in fact, satellites like Himawari, which are stored in HDF5 or netCDF files. Additionally, there could be usage of PyProj or even Cartopy for geospatial analysis, like converting coordinates of lightning points to maps of an image grid.
During the development of our models, we intend to employ Jupyter notebooks or Python code to develop our models iteratively, with the experiments recorded using tensorboard (in case of TensorFlow models) or a logging facility. Since the learning is meant to be a compute-intensive exercise, we are likely to need a GPU-equipped computer, preferably with an NVIDIA GPU and a memory of at least 8-12 GB. The learning exercise may take a few hours to a few days depending on the size of our dataset; we will likely mini-batch our learning (batch size likely to be in the order of 32 patches/batch in the classifier, potentially 1-2 images/batch in the segmentation algorithm, if memory allows).
We will also follow best practices in software engineering, including the use of a version control system (such as Git) to keep code organized and the breakdown of the code that loads data, pre-processes the data, defines the model, trains the model, and evaluates the model.
3.5 Evaluation Strategy
A thorough evaluation study will be undertaken to evaluate the performance of the proposed model. To evaluate the performance of the proposed model, the collection of data, which contains the relevant information required by the model, will be divided into three parts – the training set, the validation set, and the test set, as follows:
•Accuracy: Ratio of correct predictions regarding whether it is lightning or no light. Accuracy is a good metric, albeit not perfect, particularly when dealing with imbalanced classes (few cases where it is lightning, and always predicting "no lightning" could still result in a good accuracy score).
• Precision (Positive Predictive Value): The number of cases that actually have lightning given the total number of cases predicted by the model to have lightning. This measures the rate of false alarms, and models that have a high precision usually have a low rate of alarms being false when the alarm is raised by the system.
•      Recall (Probability of Detection): Out of the actual lightning occurrences, how many were predicted successfully by the system. This is a very important measure for us when it comes to our application because a higher value for recall would mean that we err very infrequently when it comes to missing actual lightning occurrences.
•F1-Score: This is the harmonic mean of the precision and recall. It is used as a measure of the performance of the model on the positive class. The use of F1-score is important when dealing with imbalanced classes. Since the classes are imbalanced, we would like the F1 score of the model to be high. This means the model is generally good at predicting lightning.
•ROC-AUC (Receiver Operating Characteristic – Area Under Curve): We will use the model’s prediction probabilities and calculate the ROC curve using different thresholds. The AUC metric calculates the probability that it will rank a random positive sample higher than a random negative one. If it has good discrimination, it should have a large AUC close to 1.0. Because in meteorology, thresholds matter, we will use this metric more to check overall performance.
Apart from these, the following domain-specific metrics will be computed:
•POD (Probability of Detection) and FAR (False Alarm Ratio): These are meteorological terms that are the same as the recall rate and the complement of precision, respectively. Although these are not items that need to be provided as an answer, they are requested within the study of lightning because they are commonly required (Lee & Suh, 2024 state POD and FAR).
•Heidke Skill Score (HSS) and True Skill Statistic (TSS): These indicate skill in comparison to chance or climatology. HSS examines hits against random chance, and TSS = POD + Specificity – 1; TSS is otherwise known as Peirce’s skill score. Both TSS and Heidke scores range between – ∞ and 1 (1 = perfect). These are often used for forecasting verification. We can calculate them to have a comprehensive assessment of how much better our results are than a no-skill model.
We will do some error analysis on the output to investigate the false alarms and missed detections in our model’s predictions. By looking at the satellite images of the false alarms and missed detections, there may be some patterns to be found (for example, false alarms could occur on cold-top stratiform clouds that resemble thunder clouds in satellite images but are not associated with lightning; missed detections could occur on low-top but electrified storms that our model just missed). This could help inform further model improvement, perhaps including input variables like a lightning “jump” in radar if it is available – although this is out of our present scope.
During development, the metrics calculated on the validation set will be used for model tuning (e.g., when to stop the training process, which architecture performs better). We will make sure that there will be no use of the test set in model training or tuning.
3.6 Ethical Considerations and Constraints
Despite being fundamentally concerned with environmental data, a number of concerns have been identified that deserve to be addressed:
Data Ethics and Privacy: The type of data used (satellite imagery and lightning occurrence) is not of a personal nature, thus raising less concern regarding privacy. However, it is critical to ensure that appropriate permission is sought regarding the usage of MMD’s lightning occurrence data, which might be considered proprietary/sensitive in nature. Adherence to any guidelines regarding the sharing of the data will be ensured, and it will be used exclusively for its intended purpose in the research. The findings will be presented in aggregate, and any usage of the models/datasets will be done only with MMD’s consent or in the use of any publicly available components.
Precision and Public Safety: One of the biggest ethical considerations relates to the purpose of nowcasts made by models. For example, if a lightning forecasting system is developed, a false negative result could mean a danger to lives, while a false positive outcome could result in a loss of trust among people when raised through alarms. The system, despite its effectiveness, should only supplement current human analysts, until it is properly verified. The importance of its outputs will be implicit in that it is a task that has to be interpreted by meteorologists. The conservative bias while dealing with thresholding will also reflect a preference toward over-warning as compared to under-warning, especially when it comes to public safety.
Model Bias and Generality: The model will be developed and trained on past events. If past conditions are not representative or are biased in some manner (such as biases in sensing networks or outages in those networks), this could create a less-than-ideal outcome in some set of circumstances, like very atypical storms. The deployment of this model, therefore, involves monitoring and updating, as necessary, with limitations clearly labeled, such as “the model has difficulties with nights and continental areas” if this is what is observed.
Environmental Impact of Computing: Computing can be environment-intensive when training deep learning models. Although the size of the data is not particularly large compared to other deep learning models, the impact of computing on the environment is still of concern. Optimized coding and cloud computing will be used to prevent wasteful computing. To the extent possible, the energy used and the emissions associated with the training of the models will be measured.
Open Source and Reproducibility: The project seeks to enhance scientific progress by making the code and the model (except for the proprietary datasets) open source. This is essential, especially in cases where public institutions are using the model. While it is true that interpretability of deep learning algorithms, such as Grad-CAM, is not within its focus, it shall try to utilize such algorithms to analyze some samples and see if it is focusing on meteorologically valid parts of the images (e.g., the middle of a thunderstorm) and not just some random patterns.
Constraints: The project has a time constraint and available computing power. The project would deal with the complexity by increasing the difficulty level from a single-channel image and a basic CNN to a more sophisticated system involving multi-channel images and possibly time components. The constraints of the project would be the learning curve involved when dealing with a massive amount of data from the satellite images; appropriate software would be used for the simplicity involved in the process. Real-time testing would not be required in the project but a real-time test using the data over time would be performed by dividing the data into specific times or segments.
Overall, the proposed methodology approach relative to the development of a deep learning system for the lightning nowcasting, it should be felt that the strategy mitigates risks associated with development by applying established architectures to the problem at hand. Further, it is flexible enough to incorporate any insights or learning achieved during the experimental stages (e.g., modifying the threshold conditions based upon the outcomes of the initial experiment). This approach aligns contemporary best practices in AI as it applies to the field of meteorology.
Chapter 4: Work Plan & Timeline
The capstone project consists of two educational phases: CP1 (Proposal Phase) and CP2 (Implementation Phase). The CP1 takes place from February to April, where there are no activities related to technical tasks, and everything involves literature studies, proposal development, and planning. Every technical activity, such as data processing, takes place during the CP2, which occurs from May to August.
CP1 - Proposal Phase (February-April)
CP1 involves literature review for weeks 1 through 3. During this phase, the project theme is formalized, the scope is defined as a parameter for detection, and more than 20 sources are used in the literature review. The milestone for this phase is developing the literature matrix and formalizing the research theme by week 3. There are no dependencies for this phase.
Starting from Week 4 to Week 6, the design for the methodology is determined. This stage also conceives the patch-based ResNet-50 CNN model architecture, the proposed preprocessing techniques, the method for evaluation, and the overall evaluation process. Dependencies for this stage include the findings for the literature review. The milestone for this stage is finishing Chapter 3: Methodology by Week 6. In weeks 6 and 7, there is emphasis on risk analysis and project schedule planning. A Gantt timeline and risk register are created with complex dependencies and risks for CP2. The milestone in this stage is to complete the risk analysis and final Work Breakdown Structure to ensure CP2 remains within scope. Weeks 8 through 11 are primarily spent on writing. The four chapters namely, Introduction, Problem Statement, Literature Review, and Methodology, are written with in-text citations in APA style. The milestone here is to submit a draft of the proposal to the supervisor by Week 11, subject to completion of all preceding stages of CP1. Week 12 is spent on finalizing the proposal, also getting ready for the oral defense. The phase ends with a finalized proposal submitted and a pass in the oral defense.
CP2 - Implementation Phase (May – August)
Starting from weeks 13 to 14, the implementation phase of the project begins. Data acquisition from the Malaysian Meteorological Department and global lightning sources would have finished at this point. This has to happen in a very well-coordinated fashion regarding the timing and the region. The end-product of this phase would be the classified dataset that has been separated into training and testing parts. The major risk involved in this phase could be the delay in acquiring the dataset. The contingency plans would involve the possibility of acquiring the dataset from public sources or artificial augmentation techniques. From Week 15 through Week 17, the model development phase will occur. The design for the CNN model will then be encoded based on either PyTorch or TensorFlow programming. The processes involved in the validation steps for the optimization approach, geared toward enhancing the accuracy of the detections, will rely on the successful execution of the data processing phase. During weeks 18-19, the trained model will be evaluated using different metrics such as the F1-Score, ROC AUC, Probability of Detection (POD), False Alarm Rate (FAR), Heidke Skill Score (HSS), and Threat Score (TSS). During the evaluation process, issues that may arise include class imbalances/recall rates, which can be solved through the use of thresholding as well as data augmentation. During weeks 20-21, entails the consolidation and representation of results. The charts, overlays, and conclusions drawn from the results will also find their way into the final report in preparation for the eventual presentation and submission of the final report. Finally, Week 22 includes tasks for final submissions and the CP2 presentation. The formal report, which will include all project documents, results from modeling, and outcomes of analysis, will be presented to the evaluation panel. Through this, this staged plan ensures that CP1 achieves planning and proposal objectives fully without any deviation related to implementation, while CP2 is strictly structured for accomplishment, evaluation, and execution.
References
Abadi, M., Barham, P., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Davis, A., Dean, J., … & Zheng, X. (2016). TensorFlow: A system for large-scale machine learning. Proceedings of the 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 2016), 265–283. https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/osdi16/osdi16-abadi.pdf
Bessho, K., Date, K., Hayashi, M., Ikeda, A., Imai, T., Inoue, H., … & Yoshida, R. (2016). An introduction to Himawari-8/9—Japan’s new-generation geostationary meteorological satellites. Journal of the Meteorological Society of Japan, 94(2), 151–183. https://doi.org/10.2151/jmsj.2016-009
Christian, H. J., Blakeslee, R. J., Boccippio, D. J., Boeck, W. L., & Mach, D. M. (2003). Global frequency and distribution of lightning as observed from space by the Optical Transient Detector. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 108(D1), 4005. https://doi.org/10.1029/2002JD002347
Cintineo, J. L., Pavolonis, M. J., & Sieglaff, J. M. (2022). ProbSevere LightningCast: A deep-learning model for satellite-based lightning nowcasting. Weather and Forecasting, 37(7), 1239–1257. https://doi.org/10.1175/WAF-D-22-0019.1
Goodman, S. J., Blakeslee, R. J., Koshak, W. J., Mach, D. M., Bailey, J. C., Buechler, D. E., … & Stano, G. (2013). The GOES-R Geostationary Lightning Mapper (GLM). Atmospheric Research, 125–126, 34–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres.2013.01.006
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., & Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual learning for image recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 770–778. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90
Lagerquist, R., Stewart, J. Q., Ebert-Uphoff, I., & Kumler, C. (2021). Using deep learning to nowcast the spatial coverage of convection from Himawari-8 satellite data. Monthly Weather Review, 149(12), 3897–3921. https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-21-0096.1
Lee, S.-H., & Suh, M.-S. (2024). Lightning detection using GEO-KOMPSAT-2A/AMI and ground-based lightning network (LINET) data. Remote Sensing, 16(22), 4243. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs16224243
Leinonen, J., Hamann, U., & Germann, U. (2022). Seamless lightning nowcasting with recurrent-convolutional deep learning. Artificial Intelligence for the Earth Systems, 1(4), e220043. https://doi.org/10.1175/AIES-D-22-0043.1
Li, F., Li, J., Gu, S., Wang, Y., Li, Z., Zhang, L., … & Jiang, Z. (2025). Nowcasting of cloud-to-ground lightning location and frequency based on a deep learning technique. Atmospheric and Oceanic Science Letters. (Advance online publication). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aosl.2025.100607
Lu, M., Zhang, Y., Chen, M., Yu, M., & Wang, M. (2022). Monitoring lightning location based on deep learning combined with multisource spatial data. Remote Sensing, 14(9), 2200. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs14092200
Mehranzamir, K., Beiranvand Pour, A., Abdul-Malek, Z., Afrouzi, H. N., Alizadeh, S. M., & Hashim, M. (2023). Implementation of ground-based lightning locating system using particle swarm optimization for lightning mapping and monitoring. Remote Sensing, 15(9), 2306. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs15092306
Nazri, K. N., Lim, S. C., & Gomes, C. (2021). Lightning safety awareness level in Malaysia. F1000Research, 10, 921. https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.73064.2
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., … & Chintala, S. (2019). PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 8024–8035. https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/bdbca288fee7f92f2bfa9f7012727740-Paper.pdf
Romps, D. M., Seeley, J. T., Vollaro, D., & Molinari, J. (2014). Projected increase in lightning strikes in the United States due to global warming. Science, 346(6211), 851–854. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1259100
Simonyan, K., & Zisserman, A. (2015). Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556
Sulaiman, M. H., Mohamed, A. I., & Mustaffa, Z. (2023). An application of deep learning for lightning prediction in East Coast Malaysia. E-Prime – Advances in Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Energy, 3, 100340. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prime.2023.100340
Wang, X., Hu, K., Wu, Y., & Zhou, W. (2023). A survey of deep learning-based lightning prediction. Atmosphere, 14(11), 1698. https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos14111698
Zhou, K., Zheng, Y., Dong, W., & Wang, T. (2020). A deep learning network for cloud-to-ground lightning nowcasting with multisource data. Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, 37(5), 927–942. https://doi.org/10.1175/JTECH-D-19-0146.1
Zhou, W., Li, J., Wang, H., & Zhang, D. (2024). Forecasting of local lightning using spatial–channel-enhanced recurrent convolutional neural network. Atmosphere, 15(12), 1478. https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos15121478
